## **Assignment No. 1 (Concrete and it's ingredients)**  


**Notes:**
- Attempt at least 05 questions each from Section A, B and C; and attempt all questions from Section D. *(Total no. of Questions to be attempted = 20)*
- The assignment may be *hand-written* or *typed*.
- The assignment has to submitted on **[Course Page](https://guru.gndec.ac.in/21_22/course/view.php?id=641#section-1)** before due date (i.e. 10.03.2022, 11:59 pm).
- The submission file will be accepted in pdf format only.
- Copying of Assignment is highly discouraged and may be penalized. It is expected that every individual should thoroughly study the topic and then attempt the Assignment.
- To submit assignment **[Click Here](https://guru.gndec.ac.in/21_22/course/view.php?id=641#section-1)**.

----

### Section - A (Cement)

1. Enlist the major compounds of ordinary Portland cement and briefly describe their importance.
2. Describe in detail, the phenomena of hydration of cement.
3. What do you mean by the term *Standard Consistency*?
4. Differentiate between *Initial Setting time* and *Final Setting time* of cement.
5. Describe the test for determining standard consistency, initial setting and final setting times of cement.
6. State the IS requirements for *setting times* for general purpose OPC; rapid hardening and low heat Portland cements.
7. Why is the field testing of cement important? List ways of testing cement at the field.
8. What is unsoundness of cement? Explain the testing procedure to determine the unsoundness of cement with a neat sketch of the apparatus.
9. Enlist different types of cement.
10. Differentiate between Low heat cement and Rapid hardening cement on the basis of their composition and application.

----

### Section - B (Aggregates)

1. What are aggregates? What is its role in making of concrete?
2. How is the aggregate classified according to size, shape and texture?
3. What is alkali-silica reactivity (ASR) and how is it avoided?
4. Explain the effect of size, shape, texture and grading of aggregate on concrete.
5. What are the factors governing the use of maximum size of aggregate in reinforced concrete?
6. Discuss the bulking of sand.
7. Write a short note on *Recycled Concrete Aggregate*.
8. What do you mean by grading of aggregates? Give its significance.
9. Describe the process of sieve analysis for determination of fineness modulus of an aggregate in tabular form.
10. Determine the fineness modulus of aggregate for the following result of sieve analysis. What does the result indicate?

| IS sieve size      | 10 mm | 4.75 mm | 2.36 mm | 1.18 mm | 600 μm | 300 μm | 150 μm | 75 μm |
|:-------------------|:------|:--------|:--------|:--------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:------|
| Percentage Passing | 100   | 92      | 74      | 55      | 23     | 12     | 9      | 7     |

----

### Section - C (Admixtures)

1. What are admixtures and mineral additives?
2. List various types of admixtures and explain any two of them.
3. Explain the adverse effect of excessive use of admixtures.
4. What is meant by grouting admixture? What are its required properties and how can these properties be improved?
5. What are air-entraining admixtures? How do they affect water-cement ratio, segregation and bleeding, and permeability of concrete?
6. Explain the action and application of water reducing admixtures.
7. Explain the role of plasticizers in concrete.
8. Compare Damp-proofing admixtures and Permeability reducing admixtures.
9. What are mineral or supplementary additives? Describe fly ash and silica fume.
10. What is the role of Accelerating admixtures?

----

### Section - D (Water)

1. What are the essential characteristics of water that can be used for mixing and curing of concrete?
2. What are the two vital functions of the water as an ingredient of concrete?
3. What is water-cement ratio? Give its significance.
4. List various factors deciding the water-cement ratio in the concrete.  
5. Why high water-cement ratio is not recommended? List at least five reasons.

----
*Prof. Yuvraj Singh*
