## **Assignment No. 2 (Properties & Production of Concrete)**  


**Notes:**
- Attempt all 05 questions from Section A, at least 10 questions from Section B. *(Total no. of Questions to be attempted = 15)*
- The assignment may be *hand-written* or *typed*.
- The assignment has to submitted at **[Here](https://guru.gndec.ac.in/21_22/course/view.php?id=641#section-1)** before due date (i.e. 10.03.2022, 11:59 pm).
- The submission file will be accepted in pdf format only.
- Copying of Assignment is highly discouraged and may be penalized. It is expected that every individual should thoroughly study the topic and then attempt the Assignment.
- To submit assignment **[Click Here](https://guru.gndec.ac.in/21_22/course/view.php?id=641#section-1)**.

----

### Section - A (Properties of Fresh Concrete)

1. Define workability of concrete; enlist the different methods for measuring it in the laboratory? Explain any one of them.
2. Describe the factors affecting the workability of fresh concrete. How does workability of fresh concrete different from its rheology?
3. Explain the compacting factor test. Compare it with slump test.
4. Describe segregation, bleeding and laitance of concrete. Explain the factors affecting them.
5. Explain different types of slump with the help of sketch.

----

### Section - B (Properties of Hardened Concrete)

1. What does strength in concrete mean? List the different types of concrete strengths.
2. How are compressive and flexural strengths determined? What if the relationship between compressive and flexural strength?
3. Why is compressive strength usually considered being most important in concrete design?
4. What are the fundamental factors influencing the compressive strength of concrete? Explain any one of them.
5. What if gel/space ratio? How does it influence the strength of concrete?
6. Describe the three phases of concrete that affect the strength of concrete.
7. Explain the test parameters related to the specimen and loading which affect the strength of concrete.
8. State the destructive tests performed on hardened concrete and describe the split tension test on concrete cylinder and cube for determining the tensile strength of concrete. Also enlist the merits of this indirect test.
9. Discuss the various aspect of durability of concrete. What measures are suggested by IS 456:2000 to ensure durable structure?
10. List the causes of lack of durability and explain how chloride-ion penetration affects the durability.
11. Write short notes on the following:
  - a) Durability and its significance
  - b) Permeability of Concrete
  - c) Creep, its importance and factors affecting it
  - d) Shrinkage and factors affecting it
12. What is alkali-silica reactivity (ASR)? Enlist the factors that promote the alkali-silica reaction. How can the damage from alkali-silica reaction (ASR) in a concrete structure be diagnosed?
13. Write short notes on the following:
  - a) Efflorescence and its prevention
  - b) Fire resistance of concrete
  - c) Concrete in Marine environment
  - d) Factors affecting the modulus of elasticity of Concrete
14. Describe the phenomenon of micro-cracking of hardened concrete.
15. List various causes of cracking in concrete. Also, discuss different types of cracks and illustrate with the help of sketches.

---

### Section - C (Production of Concrete)

1. What are the different stages of manufacturing of concrete? Describe in detail the compaction of concrete.
2. What is the effect of vibration on the strength and durability of concrete? Explain the different types of vibrators.
3. Assuming that concrete is made from the correct ingredients and in the correct proportions, what other requirements must be met to ensure a durable structure, that is, a structure with long life?
4. Differentiate between volume batching and weigh batching. In concrete mix procedure which one is superior?
5. Explain different methods of transporting concrete.
6. What is pumped concrete and what are the precautions taken in pumping the concrete?
7. State the different types of special concreting techniques. Explain the ready mixed concrete with its classification and merits.
8. What is curing of concrete and its objectives? Enlist the various methods for curing and describe the membrane curing.
9. What are the basic requirements of formwork for concrete construction? Describe slip-forming technique. Also, define stripping time.
10. Write short notes on the following:
  - a) Maturity of concrete
  - b) Prolonged vibration and re-vibration
  - c) Effect of delay in placing

----
*Prof. Yuvraj Singh*
